FIGURE 95. Benign Infantile Seizures (Benign Partial Epilepsy in Infancy). A previously healthy 9-week-old boy developed clusters of 5–10 seizures per day for 3 
days. Seizures began with twitching of the left upper and lower extremities and spread to the left side of the face and then to the right upper and lower extremities, lasting for 
2–5 minutes. The seizures ﬁ  nally stopped after multiple AEDs, including lorazepam, topiramate, phenytoin, and levetriacetam were tried. Extensive workup for metabolic and 
infectious diseases was unremarkable. MRI reveals cytotoxic edema, probably secondary to seizures in bilateral frontal regions, greater on the left. At a 7-month clinic visit, the 
patient had normal developmental milestones and had no seizures. A repeat MRI showed disappearance of the previous cytotoxic edema. EEG was normal.
The age of onset was under 1 year and ranged from 3 to 20 months. Seizures occurred in clusters, 1–10 times a day for 1–3 days, sometimes recurring every 1–8 weeks. The 
duration of seizures ranged from 30 to 217 sec. Seizures occurred either during wakefulness or during sleep. They were characterized by motion arrest, decreased responsiveness, 
staring or blank eyes mostly with automatisms, and mild convulsive movements. Convulsive movements consist of eye deviation or head rotation, mild clonic movements 
involving the face, eyelids, or limbs, and increased limb tone.
Benign infantile seizures are characterized by (1) familial or nonfamilial occurrence; (2) normal development prior to onset; (3) onset mostly during the ﬁ  rst year of life; (4) no 
underlying disorders nor neurological abnormalities; (5) complex partial seizures or secondarily generalized seizures often occurring in clusters; (6) normal interictal EEG; (7) ictal 
EEG most often showing a temporal focus; (8) excellent response to treatment; and (9) normal developmental outcome. Ictal EEGs and clinical seizures are not much diﬀ erent 
from those of infants with refractory seizures.2–6