FIGURE 5 56. Asymmetric Spindle Coma; Acute Amoebic Meningoencephalitis with Herniation Syndrome. A 10-year-old boy with refractory status epilepticus and coma caused by 
the amoeba Balamuthia mandrillaris. Axial MRI with FLAIR sequence and coronal T1-weighted image with GAD show an infarction of the right basal ganglion and midbrain (arrow) and Kernohan 
phenomenon in the opposite hemisphere (open arrow). EEG reveals asymmetrically diﬀ use spindle and delta coma with less abundant spindles and more pronounced polymorphic delta activity in 
the right hemisphere. In this patient, spindle and delta coma is most likely due to the lesions in the midbrain and basal ganglia caused by infarction and brain herniation syndrome. The patient died a 
few days after this EEG. 
Rhythmic coma patterns were found in 30.2% of EEG recordings in coma. Etiology, reactivity, and outcome of spindle, beta, alpha, and theta coma patterns are similar. The reactive pattern was 
associated with favorable outcome (66.7%). The nonreactive rhythmic pattern was associated with unfavorable outcome (60%). Sequential EEG recordings are required to detect the evolution of 
rhythmic coma patterns during childhood.100 The prognosis depends mainly on the primary disease process rather than the EEG ﬁ  nding. The prognosis of rhythmic coma pattern is better in children 
than in adults. The rhythmic coma pattern is probably caused by interruption of reticulothalamocortical pathways by metabolic or structural abnormalities.101 An incomplete pattern has a better 
prognosis.98,102,103
More than 440 cases of severe central nervous system infections caused by Acanthamoeba spp., B. mandrillaris, and Naegleria fowleri have been reported.104 Balamuthia encephalitis may occur in 
any age group, may or may not be associated with immunosuppression, and usually has a subacute and fatal course from hematogenous dissemination of chronic skin or lung lesions.97 Common 
features that might be of value in the diagnosis of Balamuthia encephalitis are high CSF protein, hydrocephalus, and Hispanic ethnicity.106 When purulent CSF is obtained and when no bacteria are 
noted in a patient with meningoencephalitis, the CSF should be examined speciﬁ  cally for other organisms, including amoeba. PCR assay and speciﬁ  c antibodies to Balamuthia are available. Brain 
biopsy should be considered in patients with encephalitis of unknown etiology whose condition deteriorates despite treatment with acyclovir.107 Chronic necrotizing vasculitis and focal hemorrhages 
are typical ﬁ  ndings in Balamuthia infections.108,109 The prognosis is very poor due to delayed diagnosis, diﬃ  culty in isolation/identiﬁ  cation of the organism, and lack of well-established treatment.110