FIGURE 6 36. Asymmetric Spindle Coma; Acute Amoebic Meningoencephalitis with Herniation Syndrome. A 10-year-old boy with refractory status epilepticus and 
coma caused by amoeba Balamuthia mandrillaris. Axial MRI with FLAIR sequence and coronal T1-weighted image with GAD show an infarction of the right basal ganglion and 
midbrain (arrow) and Kernohan phenomenon in the opposite hemisphere (open arrow). EEG reveals asymmetrically diﬀ use spindle and delta coma with less abundant spindles 
and more pronounced polymorphic delta activity in the right hemisphere. In this patient, spindle and delta coma is most likely due to the lesions in the midbrain and basal 
ganglion caused by infarction and brain herniation syndrome. The patient died a few days after this EEG.
Rhythmic coma patterns were found in 30.2% of recordings. Etiology, reactivity, and outcome of spindle, beta, alpha, and theta coma patterns are similar. The reactive pattern 
was associated with favorable outcome in 67%. The nonreactive rhythmic pattern was associated with unfavorable outcome in 60%. Sequential EEG recordings are required to 
detect the evolution of rhythmic coma patterns during childhood.52,55 The prognosis depends mainly on the primary disease process rather than the EEG ﬁ  nding. The prognosis of 
rhythmic coma pattern is better in children than in adults. The rhythmic coma pattern is probably caused by the interruption of reticulothalamocortical pathways by metabolic or 
structural abnormalities.65 Incomplete pattern has a better prognosis.4,61,67,69
More than 440 cases of severe central nervous system infections caused by Acanthamoeba spp., B. mandrillaris, and Naegleria fowleri have been reported.70 Balamuthia 
encephalitis may occur in any age group, may or may not be associated with immunosuppression, and usually has a subacute and fatal course from hematogenous dissemination 
of chronic skin or lung lesions. Common features that might be of value in diagnosis of Balamuthia encephalitis are high CSF protein, hydrocephalus, and Hispanic ethnicity.71 
When purulent CSF is obtained and when no bacteria are noted in a patient with meningoencephalitis, the CSF should be examined speciﬁ  cally for other organisms, including 
amoeba. PCR assay and speciﬁ  c antibodies to Balamuthia are available. Brain biopsy should be considered in patients with encephalitis of unknown etiology whose condition 
deteriorates despite treatment with acyclovir.72 Chronic necrotizing vasculitis and focal hemorrhages are typical ﬁ  ndings in Balamuthia infections.73,74 The prognosis is very poor 
due to delayed diagnosis, diﬃ  culty in isolation/identiﬁ  cation of the organism, and lack of well-established treatment.75