FIGURE 9 83. Hypomelanosis of lto Associated with Hemimegalencephaly; Recurrent Seizures After Functional Hemispherectomy: lnsula Seizure. A pathologically 
left-handed 9-year-old boy with hypomelanosis of Ito associated with left hemimegalencephaly and intractable epilepsy. He underwent left functional hemispherectomy 9 
months prior to this EEG. He did well for several months following the surgery but began having recurrent seizures that were much milder and limited to right facial twitching and 
posturing of the right hand. He was alert throughout. Sometimes, he had a feeling of choking.
EEG during the seizure shows rhythmic theta activity in the left midtemporal region. Ictal SPECT demonstrates hyperperfusion in the left insular cortex (arrow).
Thirty-eight to 88% of patients are seizure free after undergoing hemispherectomy. Factors aﬀ ecting the surgical outcome include (1) the causes of the seizures, with patients 
having cortical dysplasia faring worse than those with Rasmussen encephalitis and infarction;155 (2) follow-up length; (3) duration of seizures prior to surgery; and (4) whether the 
basal ganglia, thalamus, or insular cortex are included in the resection/disconnection.156,157 The insular cortex has connections with the cerebral cortex, the amygdala, other limbic 
areas, the dorsal thalamus, and the basal ganglia. The proximity of the basal ganglia makes removal of the insular cortex challenging. The risk of complications is minimal in surgical 
resection of the insula.156 Repeat surgery should be considered in patients with incomplete disconnection or residual insular cortex, conﬁ  rmed on postoperative MRIs, if they continue 
to have seizures after surgical treatment. Good results of seizure freedom after reoperation were reported.158–160 The semiology of insular seizures includes sensation of laryngeal 
constriction, paresthesias aﬀ ecting large cutaneous territories, dysarthric speech, focal motor convulsive symptoms, dysgeusia, and contralateral somatosensory phenomena.161