FIGURE 9 97. Symptomatic Absence Seizure and ESES; Thalamic Heterotopia. A 6-year-old boy with intractable symptomatic absence epilepsy and cognitive dysfunction caused by right 
thalamic heterotopia (arrow). Complete resection of the heterotopia results in seizure freedom.
Alterations in normal thalamocortical reciprocal interactions are critical in the generation of the regular generalized spike-wave discharges characteristic of the idiopathic generalized epilepsies.196
Most patients with unilateral thalamic lesion and epilepsy showed bilateral synchronous GSW discharges.191–195 Absence status with bilateral GSW discharges caused by ischemic lesion in the left 
thalamus has been reported.192 Children with thalamic lesions should be monitored closely for ESES. Lesions of the inferior-medial-posterior thalamic structures might have a role in the pathogenesis 
of bilateral spike-wave (SW) discharges and ESES by the mechanism of disinhibition, possibly through the GABAergic system of zona incerta and its projections.193
Gray matter heterotopias are caused by a halt in neuronal radial migration and consist of clusters of neurons separated from the cortex by white matter and not organized in layers like the normal 
cortex.197 Although gray matter heterotopia is commonly associated with refractory epilepsy, it is still uncertain which role heterotopic lesions play for seizure onset and propagation and whether 
they are epileptogenic. Intracranial EEG investigations showed apparently contradictory results implying that seizures are generated sometimes by the heterotopias, sometimes by the distant cortex, 
and sometimes by both. However, neither the removal of the lesion alone nor mesial temporal resection leads to a favorable outcome, suggesting a more widespread epileptogenic network in 
these patients. Seizure onset in heterotopia is sometimes completely outside the lesion and sometimes has some overlap with the lesion. Heterotopia is part of a more complex circuitry involving 
the surrounding and distant cerebral cortex.98,198 High-frequency oscillations (HFOs), especially fast ripples, are closely linked to seizure onset areas. In focal cortical dysplasia and sometimes in 
heterotopia, HFOs occur in lesional areas that are not part of the seizure onset zone, and they may indicate potential epileptogenicity of these regions.77,78,199