FIGURE 7 25. Asymmetric Hypsarrhythmia (Hemihypsarrhythmia) (Ipsilateral); Intraventricular Hemorrhage with Subsequent Left cerebral Hemiatrophy. A 9-month-old girl with a 
history of a new-onset asymmetric infantile spasm due to grade 4 IVH. Her seizures were described as clusters of subtle spells of head and eyes deviating to the right side without deﬁ  nite ﬂ  exor or 
extensor spasms, lasting for approximately 1 sec. (A) CT image during an acute IVH shows dilatation of lateral ventricles, intraventricular hemorrhages with abnormally hypodense areas surrounding 
them (presumably infarct or edematous) with left-sided predominance, and intraparenchymal hemorrhage in the left occipital region. (B) CT image at 6 months of age shows diﬀ use cerebral atrophy, 
greater on the left, with VP shunt placement into the temporal horn of the left lateral ventricle. EEG demonstrates chaotic, very high-voltage polymorphic delta slowing intermixed with multifocal 
sharp waves in the left hemisphere, with relatively normal background activity in the right hemisphere. These ﬁ  ndings are termed “asymmetric hypsarrhythmia.”
Asymmetric hypsarrhythmia is also referred to as hemihypsarrhythmia or unilateral hypsarrhythmia and is characterized by the presence of hypsarrhythmia with a consistent amplitude asymmetry 
between hemispheres. Asymmetric hypsarrhythmia is always associated with underlying structural abnormalities of the brain. However, it should be noted that the hypsarrhythmic activity may 
be maximal over either the more abnormal or the more normal hemisphere.31 It is more commonly seen in patients with malformation of cortical development. The presence of asymmetric 
hypsarrhythmia and other variant hypsarrhythmic patterns is more common than previously thought and generally does not correlate with prognosis.71 In children with leukomalacia and in patients 
with localized porencephalic lesions, the outcome of epilepsy appears to be better than in patients with diﬀ use cerebral lesions or in children with extensive porencephalic cysts, particularly 
those involving the frontal lobe.73 Atrophy of midbrain and pons and the presence of bilateral parieto-occipital polyspike-wave discharges on follow-up EEGs were strongly correlated with the 
development of West syndrome.74,75