FIGURE 7 40. Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome (LGS); Generalized Slow Spike-Wave Discharges (SSW). A 14-year-old girl with a triad of severe mental retardation, multiple types of seizures, 
with tonic seizures, atypical absences, and drop attacks being the three most common seizure types, and a typical EEG showing generalized slow spike-wave (SSW) discharges with anterior 
predominance. 
The classic EEG feature of LGS, the SSW pattern, consists of a spike or a sharp wave followed ﬁ  rst by a positive deep “trough” and then by a negative wave (350–400 msec).103 Most often, it is a sharp 
wave followed by a slow wave and less often spikes or polyspikes followed by a slow wave.104 The amplitude of the SSW is usually higher over the frontal or fronto-central regions in approximately 
90% of patients. Less than 10% of the SSW shows occipital predominance. The frequency of the SSW varies from 1 to 4 cps, commonly between 1.5 and 2.5 cps. The SSW discharges of LGS, unlike the 
classic 3-cps spike waves of absence epilepsy, only rarely show a very regular repetition rate; their characteristic feature is irregularity in frequency, amplitude, morphology and distribution.105,106
The abundance and the waxing and waning characteristics of SSWs commonly blur any distinction between ictal and interictal patterns. SSWs can therefore be distinguished from 3-Hz spike-wave 
discharges, which are usually associated with a clinical change if their duration is longer than 3 sec. The duration of the paroxysms of SSW activity also varies widely, but they are distinguished from 
classic 3-Hz spike waves by their abundance; they often appear in prolonged sequences without clinical changes. Hence, the SSW activity of LGS is usually considered to be an interictal pattern. Bursts, 
which last several seconds in duration and may be almost continuous, are often associated with some clouding of consciousness. As such thismay constitute an atypical absence or even absence status.
Although the SSW pattern is fairly symmetric over the two hemispheres, shifting asymmetry in diﬀ erent bursts is common. Persistent focal or lateralized asymmetry of SSW activity may occur in 
as as many as 25% of patients.105 The background activity is also abnormal with varying degrees of diﬀ use slowing in 70–90% of patients. Focal and multifocal epileptiform discharges are seen in 
14–18% of the patients.104–106
Photic stimulation in patients with LGS typically fails to “activate” SSWs, which distinguishes LGS from some myoclonic epilepsies. Tonic seizures, which are thought to be a characteristic sign of 
Lennox-Gastaut syndrome, are not present at onset, and the EEG features are not pathognomonic of the disorder.103