FIGURE 7 16. High-Voltage, Frontal-Dominant, Generalized Slow Wave Transient; Symptomatic West syndrome and Asymmetric Epileptic Spasm. (Same EEG tracing as in Figure 7-11) 
EEG during a cluster of asymmetric epileptic spasms described as brief asymmetric tonic stiﬀ ening of arms and legs with left-sided predominance (arrow head) reveals lateralized high-voltage delta 
slow activity in the left hemisphere with positive polarity delta slowing, maximal at the P3 electrode (arrow).
Eleven diﬀ erent ictal patterns were identiﬁ  ed: (1) a high-voltage, frontal-dominant, generalized slow-wave transient followed by a period of attenuation; (2) a generalized sharp- and slow-wave 
complex; (3) a generalized sharp- and slow-wave complex followed by a period of voltage attenuation; (4) a period of voltage attenuation only; (5) a generalized slow transient only; (6) a period 
of attenuation with superimposed fast activity; (7) a generalized slow-wave transient followed by a period of voltage attenuation with superimposed fast activity; (8) a period of attenuation with 
rhythmic slow activity; (9) fast activity only; (10) a sharp- and slow-wave complex followed by a period of voltage attenuation with superimposed fast activity; and (11) a period of voltage attenuation 
with superimposed fast activity followed by rhythmic slow activity. The most common pattern observed was an episode of voltage attenuation (electrodecremental episode). The duration of ictal 
events ranged from 0.5 to 106 sec, with the longer episodes being associated with the arrest phenomenon. However, there was no close correlation between speciﬁ  c ictal EEG patterns and speciﬁ  c 
types of clinical events.32
No signiﬁ  cant correlation was found between the various types of ictal EEG patterns and underlying cause (cryptogenic versus symptomatic), subsequent seizure control, or prognosis for 
developmental outcome.42
As with interictal EEG patterns, an asymmetric ictal pattern, regardless of type, does correlate with focal or lateralized structural brain lesions.30,43 The most common patterns noted were higher 
amplitude fast activity and/or more pronounced voltage attenuation on the side of the lesion. Asymmetric spasms frequently occur in patients with asymmetric ictal patterns.15 A high-voltage, 
frontal-dominant, generalized slow-wave transient is a common ictal EEG onset seen in infantile spasm. In this patient, lateralized diﬀ use high-voltage biphasic delta activity in the left hemisphere 
indicates a lateralized epileptic focus/structural abnormality in the left hemisphere. The positive sharp wave at P3 indicates a deep epileptic focus corresponding to the focal cortical dysplasia seen in 
the left mesial parieto-frontal region (arrow).