FIGURE 9 155. High-Frequency Oscillations (HFOs); Slow Direct-Current (DC) Shifts or Infraslow Activity (ISA). A 2-year-old right-handed boy with very frequent, 
brief seizures described as clusters of asymmetric tonic seizures, greater on the left side with head drops occurring 10–20 times daily. Brain MRI was normal. Interictal PET 
showed hypometabolism in the right frontal lobe. Interictal subdural EEG (sEEG) shows nearly continuous polyspike-wave discharges at FPG7 (box A). The ictal sEEG onset (box 
B) demonstrates disruption of interictal EEG activity at FPG7 and the presence of diﬀ use low-voltage fast activity consistent with high-frequency oscillations (HFOs), maximally 
expressed at FPG7. Immediately after that, slow negative direct-current (DC) shifts are noted at FPG7.
Localized negative DC shifts were recorded during penicillin-induced seizures in animal models, and they occur in association with sustained paroxysmal activity, suggesting 
that these negative shifts are an expression of cellular depolarization.286 The DC shifts were of maximal voltage at the center of the focus and had narrower distribution than 
paroxysmal activity.287 There are only limited reports of subdurally recorded DC potentials in humans.288 Other elements than neurons are additionally involved, including glia, 
ionic changes, as well as those of the blood-brain barrier and of cerebral blood ﬂ  ow, have been implicated. Ictal DC shifts or infraslow activity (ISA) obtained from scalp recordings 
with standard EEG machines with a high-pass ﬁ  lter of 0.1 Hz might be able to diﬀ erentiate between purely focal seizures versus those where there is an additional generalized 
component.129 Ictal onset baseline shifts are part of a marked increase of interictal DC shifts. The current digital EEG instruments that have a high-pass ﬁ  lter of 0.1 or at times even 
0.01 Hz can record scalp and intracranial DC shifts and could have localizing value.127,289,290 Rodin and Funke have deﬁ  ned ISA (DC shifts) as the frequency band of 0.01–0.1 Hz 
rather than 0.5 Hz because respirations, which typically have a frequency of 0.2–0.4 Hz, can contaminate the tracings when a low-pass ﬁ  lter of 0.5 Hz is used.291 In contrast to the 
conventional EEG frequencies, it has a small electrical ﬁ  eld, which is negative at the site of activity and positive at a distance.292
Ikeda concluded that (1) ictal DC shifts were observed in 85% of all the recorded seizures in subdural EEG and in 23% of all the scalp EEG recordings by using LFF of 0.016 Hz 
for the AC ampliﬁ  er; (2) ictal DC shifts were mainly surface negative in polarity; (3) they started 1–10 sec earlier than the conventional ictal EEG onset; (4) ictal DC shifts were 
seen in a more restricted area (one to two electrodes) compared with the dimension deﬁ  ned by the conventional ictal EEG changes; (5) ictal DC shifts often coincided with the 
electrodecremental pattern; (6) scalp-recorded ictal slow shifts have high speciﬁ  city but low sensitivity; and (7) a DC ampliﬁ er is not necessary to record slow DC shifts; instead, 
an AC ampliﬁ  er with long time constant could be used.127,133,289
The subdurally recorded ictal DC shifts are clinically useful in strengthening the conventional ictal EEG ﬁ  ndings and conﬁ  rming the epileptogenic area. In neocortical seizures, 
even subdural recordings show widely distributed or ill-deﬁ  ned initial ictal change, especially when imaging studies did not reveal a clear focal lesion. In addition, it would be 
diﬃ  cult to judge the area most attenuated in amplitude from the electrodecremental pattern, which is usually seen as the initial ictal EEG change in neocortical seizures. Ictal DC 
shifts, in contrast, are so prominent and transient that the areas that show the maximal changes of ictal DC shifts are easily recognized.127
After the seizure has been viewed using conventional frequencies and muscle activity has been removed, a search for baseline shifts should be performed by opening the high-
pass ﬁ  lter to at least 0.1 or 0.01 Hz. When intracranial recordings are performed the conventional frequency band, DC shifts and HFOs should be evaluated separately for seizure 
onset determination. HFOs can be ascertained by setting the high-pass ﬁ  lter at >60 Hz and leaving the low-pass ﬁ  lter open.292