FIGURE 71. Severe Neonatal Epilepsy with Suppression-Burst Pattern (Early Epileptic Encephalopathy); Erratic Myoclonus. A 5-day-old boy born full term without 
complications who presented with hypotonia, apnea, irritability, and jitteriness. He was found to have frequent erratic myoclonus and myoclonic seizures. MRI was unremarkable. 
EEG shows suppression-burst (S-B) pattern and subclinical electrographic focal seizures (not shown). It also shows no signiﬁ  cant changes during erratic myoclonus (open arrow). 
An extensive metabolic work-up was negative.
There are two severe neonatal epilepsies with S-B pattern, Ohtahara syndrome (OS) and early myoclonic encephalopathy (EME). The EEG shows bursts, lasting several seconds, 
of polyspikes alternating with very low-voltage activity, this combination being called "suppression bursts." The S-B pattern may be asymmetric, aﬀ ecting mainly the side of the 
cortical malformation, hemimegalencephaly, focal cortical dysplasia, Aicardi syndrome, olivary-dentate dysplasia, or schizencephaly.1–3 The onset of seizures in OS is within the 
ﬁ  rst 2–3 months but most commonly within the ﬁ  rst 10 days. The main type of seizure in OS is the tonic spasm. Myoclonic seizures and erratic myoclonus are rare. A majority 
of cases of OS are associated with structural brain abnormalities, including porencephaly, hydrocephalus, hemimegalencephaly, and lissencephaly. No familial case of OS have 
been reported.
EME is characterized by an early onset in the neonatal period with the main seizure types of erratic and massive myoclonus and partial seizures. The most common cause of 
EME is metabolic disease.
The causes of OS are symptomatic or organic; the causes of EME can be genetic, metabolic, or entirely unknown. OS causes tonic spasms and partial seizures. EME causes 
myoclonic and partial seizures. The EEG of OS contains periodic S-B and is irrespective of waking and sleeping, while EME may have S-B only during sleep. OS commonly 
transitions to West syndrome. EME transition to West syndrome is transient, if there is any transition at all. The EEG course of S-B in OS is that they turn into hypsarrhythmia in 
3–6 months. The EME S-B course is long lasting.4,5 However, the distinction between these two conditions may be diﬃ  cult because brief spasms are diﬃ  cult to distinguish from 
myoclonus. The distinction between S-B and hypsarrhythmia with extreme fragmentation in sleep also is diﬃ  cult in many cases because in OS, the S-B evolves into the more 
continuous asynchronous spike- and slow-wave activity of hypsarrhythmia.3