FIGURE 9 158. Symptomatic Lennox-Gastaut Syndrome; Malformation of Cortical Development Due to Duplication of Chromosome 10p 15.3. A 4-year-old girl with duplication 
of chromosome 10p15.3. She had a history of infantile spasms that evolved into Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. She had developmental delay and multiple types of seizures, including GTCS, atypical 
absence, myoclonic, and asymmetric tonic seizures. MRI shows right mesial temporal cyst (arrow), left temporal cortical dysplasia (double arrows), and left parieto-temporal periventricular nodular 
heterotopia (PNH) (open arrow). Background EEG shows generalized slow spike-and-wave discharges consistent with the diagnosis of Lennox-Gastaut syndrome. EEG during asymmetric epileptic 
spasms with right-sided predominance reveals low-voltage fast activity superimposed on diﬀ use biphasic delta activity, maximally expressed in the left parasagittal region, which is followed 
immediately by diﬀ use electrodecrement (box). The patient has been seizure free for over 2 years since the left functional hemispherectomy over 2 years ago. 
There has been no report of focal cortical dysplasia associated with duplication of chromosome 10p15.3. Bilateral lesions should not preclude consideration for hemispherectomy. On the other 
hand, bilateral EEG abnormalities can be seen in unilateral hemispheric lesions, and these ﬁ  ndings alone should not exclude the possibility of hemispherectomy. The etiology of the lesion plays a 
major role in determining the outcome.293
Unilateral PNH is frequently located in the posterior paratrigonal region (i.e., a watershed area) of the lateral ventricles and may extend into the white matter to involve adjacent neocortical and 
archicortical areas.266 Epilepsy in PNH patients is generated by abnormal anatomic circuitries including the heterotopic nodules and adjacent archicortical and neocortical areas. Regardless of the 
diﬀ erent MRI features, the main clinical problem in most PNH patients is the presence of focal drug-resistant epilepsy. The presence of risk factors for prenatal brain damage, the common location in 
the paratrigonal region, and the lack of familial cases all suggest that acquired factors, damaging a limited region of the developing brain, may provoke the genesis of unilateral nodules. The selective 
ablation of a subpopulation of dividing neuroblasts alters the migration and diﬀ erentiation of subsequently generated neurons, which in turn set the base for the formation of the heterotopia.273,274 
Focal interictal EEG abnormalities are always consistent with anatomic location of the PNH. In slow sleep, focal abnormalities frequently change in bilaterally diﬀ used bursts of polyspikes or 
multifocal interictal EEG abnormalities. Spikes may be asynchronous (mostly independent) and occur in multifocal regions. In a minority of patients, 3- to 4-Hz spike-wave discharges, mimicking 
primary generalized epilepsy, are noted.232 The ictal EEG abnormalities at the onset and immediately after the end of the seizures were always recorded in brain regions where PNH was located. These 
ﬁ  ndings suggest that epileptic discharges may take origin from abnormal circuitries located close to or involving the PNH.275 The clinical picture is related to the amount of heterotopic tissue, the 
distribution of nodules, and the extension to the overlying cortex. Therefore, the outcome is much more favorable in patients with unilateral PNH, especially single-nodule PNH, compared to patients 
with PNH associated with periventricular and subcortical nodules extending to the neocortex.266