FIGURE 57. Generalized High-Voltage Fast Activity (Alpha Band); Type 1 Lissencephaly. EEG of a 3-year-old boy with mental retardation and intractable epilepsy due to lissencephaly. 
There is generalized high-voltage 8- to 10-Hz rhythmic alpha activity with frontal-central predominance. MRI is compatible with lissencephaly type 1.
The typical EEG in lissencephaly is characterized by abnormally high-voltage rhythmic EEG activity, predominantly in the alpha and beta frequency bands (8–18 Hz). This pattern is seen in the 
waking period with high-amplitude slow rhythms and simulates slow spike-wave complexes or hypsarrhythmia. It has been suggested that this is associated with the unusual orientation of the 
anomalous neuronal columns.7 This high-amplitude rhythmic EEG activity associated with lissencephaly has high speciﬁ  city. Typical features of this EEG pattern include high voltage increasing with 
age, missing topographic structuring, no reactivity to sleep or medication, and unusually high-voltage, sharp, slow-wave complexes.8,14,15 They correlate with the severity of the brain malformation 
and the epilepsy.16 On sleep EEG, 14-Hz sleep spindles are found from early infancy but poorly observed after 1 year of age. Fourteen-hertz sleep spindles are replaced with high-amplitude rhythmic 
activity (HARA). The frequency of HARA is in the 5- to 11-Hz bands, and its amplitude is abnormally high. HARA may represent the extreme spindles reported in patients with central nervous system 
disorders.17 In an experimental study of lissencephaly, the extent of the extreme spindle activity, longer epileptiform after discharges, and seizure duration are dependent on the degree of cerebellar 
dysplasia, whereas the EEG focal abnormalities were related to lesions in the cerebral hemispheres.18
The above-described EEG pattern is not seen in type II lissencephaly. In type II lissencephaly, initially theta or delta waves of somewhat lower amplitude are initially observed. Sharp- and slow-wave 
complexes of very high amplitude are found more often in type I lissencephaly. They seem to correlate with the severity of the brain malformation and the epilepsy.16,19 The EEGs in the lissencephaly 
patients showed the following patterns: (a) generalized fast activity (8–18/sec) with an amplitude higher than 50 mV, (b) sharp- and slow-wave complexes with an amplitude higher than 500 μV, 
(c) an alternating pattern consisting of bursts of sharp waves alternating with periods of electrocerebral depression. Ninety-ﬁ ve percent show patterns (a) or (b) or both compared to only 5% of the 
patients with an atypical cortical dysplasia and 0.4% in the controls. EEG appears to be valuable in the diagnosis of lissencephaly type I.20
The EEG features and their evolution change with age. In early or middle infancy when infantile spasms begin, the EEG shows very high-amplitude (more than 400 mV) slow waves mixed with 
sharp theta waves. In late infancy, the EEG shows extreme spindles and a tendency toward bilaterally synchronous discharges of high-amplitude sharp and slow waves. The very high voltage of 
hypsarrhythmic patterns and the very low frequency of sharp-wave discharges seem to be typical in the most severe cases of lissencephaly or agyria.21