FIGURE 8 50. Anoxic Seizures; Pallid Breath Holding Spells. A 2-year-old boy with frequent tonic stiﬀ ening that always occurred after crying. The EEG when he holds his breath and 
stares oﬀ  shows diﬀ used rhythmic delta activity (arrow) followed by background attenuation during tonic stiﬀ ening (double arrows). EKG shows bradycardia. EEG returns back to normal in 
reverse fashion (open arrow) when the symptoms subside. The spells disappear after treatment with iron supplement for an iron deﬁ  ciency anemia.
BHS occur most commonly within the ﬁ  rst 18 months of age. Virtually all breath-holders cease experiencing episodes by 7–8 years of age. 70 EEGs in 129 children with breath-holding 
spells were almost always normal.71 Cardiac arrest was observed following ocular compression. With an arrest lasting 3–6 sec, there were no clinical or electrical abnormalities. However, 
with a longer cardiac arrest (7–13 sec) bisynchronous slow waves appeared. This was usually accompanied by clouding or loss of consciousness. When the arrest lasted more than 14 sec, 
one or two generalized clonic jerks appeared without aﬀ ecting the EEG. This could be followed by a generalized tonic contraction resembling decerebrate rigidity and accompanied 
by complete ﬂ  attening of the EEG. Thus, during a syncopal event the EEG initially shows mild generalized slowing. This is followed by high-voltage frontal delta activity. If the cerebral 
hypoperfusion persists, the EEG ﬂ  attens. With recovery, the EEG normalizes in a reverse sequence.71–73 Occasionally, patients may experience protracted seizures or status epilepticus 
following BHS.74,75 Typically, interictal EEG ﬁ  ndings in these patients are normal or rarely vertex spikes. They were termed episodes anoxic-epileptic seizures. Administration of an AED 
frequently ablates the lengthy seizures, although BHS may continue to occur.76 Patients with cyanotic BHS may follow this EEG evolution without signiﬁ  cant bradycardia or asystole. 
Prolonged QT syndrome is a rare, but potentially malignant, cause of anoxic seizure. It is recommended that an EKG to screen for prolonged QT syndrome be performed in all cases.77