FIGURE 77. West Syndrome; Diﬀ use Cerebral Atrophy due to Severe Hypoxic Ischemic Encephalopathy (HIE). A 5-month-old boy born 27 weeks GA with severe HIE who developed West 
syndrome at 4 months of age. EEG during wakefulness shows typical hypsarrhythmia.
The average incidence of infantile spasms is 1 in 3225 live births. The highest incidence correlates with higher geographic latitudes. The age of onset of infantile spasms varies from the ﬁ  rst week of life 
to more than 3 years of age, with the average onset at 6 months. Most cases (94%) begin within the ﬁ  rst year of life. Positive family history for epilepsy ranges from 1% to 7%.15 Gibbs and Gibbs16 deﬁ  ned 
the term hypsarrhythmia as follows: “ …random high voltage slow waves and spikes. These spikes vary from moment to moment, both in duration and in location. At times they appear to be focal, and 
a few seconds later they seem to originate from multiple foci. Occasionally the spike discharge becomes generalized, but it never appears as a rhythmically repetitive and highly organized pattern that 
could be confused with a discharge of the petit mal or petit mal variant type. The abnormality is almost continuous, and in most cases it shows as clearly in the waking as in the sleeping record.”
Five variants of hypsarrhythmia were deﬁ  ned as follows: (1) hypsarrhythmia with increased interhemispheric synchronization (35%); (2) asymmetric hypsarrhythmia (12%); (3) hypsarrhythmia with 
a consistent focus of abnormal discharge (26%); (4) hypsarrhythmia with episodes of voltage attenuation (11%); and (5) hypsarrhythmia with little spike or sharp activity (7%).17,18 Transient alterations 
of the hypsarrhythmia occur throughout the day in relation to the sleep state. During non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, the voltage of the background activity typically increases, and there 
is a tendency for grouping of the multifocal spike- and sharp-wave activity, often resulting in a periodic pattern.19,20 Electrodecremental episodes frequently occur during NREM sleep. On arousal 
from NREM sleep, there is also typically a reduction in amplitude or complete disappearance of the hypsarrhythmic pattern that may persist for a few seconds to many minutes. The hypsarrhythmic 
pattern may also disappear during a cluster of spasms but immediately returns after cessation of the spasms.17 As with the clinical spasms, hypsarrhythmia characteristically disappears with 
increasing age.21 A variety of patterns may be seen when hypsarrhythmia disappears, including diﬀ use slowing, focal or multifocal spikes and sharp waves, monorhythmic background activity, focal 
slowing, asymmetric background activity, slow spike and slow-wave activity, and diﬀ use high-voltage fast activity.22 Rarely, the EEG may be normal.
Although hypsarrhythmia and its variants are the most common EEG patterns seen in infantile spasms, other interictal patterns may occur, including focal or multifocal spikes and sharp waves, 
abnormally slow or fast rhythms, diﬀ use slowing, focal slowing, focal depression, paroxysmal slow or fast bursts, a slow spike and wave pattern, continuous spindling or, rarely a normal pattern. These 
patterns may occur singly or in various combinations.15