FIGURE 5 57. Burst-Suppression Pattern; Central Pontine Myelinolysis (CPM). A 2-year-old boy with septo-optic dysplasia with panhypopituitarism who presented to the 
ED with lethargy, poor feeding, and generalized hypotonia. He developed diabetes insipidus with Na, HCO3, and glucose of 177 MMol/L, 10 MMol/L, and 33 Mg/DL, respectively. 
He developed generalized hypertonia with intermittent tonic stiﬀ ening. Axial T2-weighted images show hyperintense signal abnormalities in the pons (arrow), cerebellum, (open 
arrow), midbrain (double arrows), and cerebral white matter (arrow head). The diagnosis of CPM was made. EEG shows a burst-suppression (B-S) pattern.
CPM and EPM (extrapontine myelinolysis) frequently coexist with other abnormalities, such as electrolyte, and other metabolic disturbances or structural cortical abnormalities. 
The EEGs (e.g., CPM in liver transplantation) may also show a variety of epileptiform abnormalities or triphasic waves, due to metabolic derangements. Although CPM and EPM do 
not involve cortical structures, involvement of white matter and subcortical nuclei can produce generalized slowing on the EEG.111,112 B-S has never been reported in CPM. 
B-S consists of bursts of high-voltage slow waves intermixed with sharp waves, alternating with periods of depressed background activity or complete electrographic 
suppression. It was ﬁ  rst described in 1949.113 Most experts consider deaﬀ erentation of the cortex from thalamus as the pathogenesis of B-S.114
At variance with cortical neurons, only 60–70% of thalamic cells ceased ﬁ  ring before overt EEG B-S and was completely silent during ﬂ  at periods of EEG activity. The remaining 
30– 40% of thalamic cells discharged rhythmic (1–4 Hz) spike bursts during periods of EEG silence. This rhythm, within the frequency range of delta waves, is generated in 
thalamic cell hyperpolarization.115 B-S and periodic spikes indicate coma with dissolution of cerebral functions down to the midbrain level.116 This theory ﬁ  ts with this patient, 
whose MRI shows involvement of brainstem at the midbrain and pontine levels.