FIGURE 7 24. West Syndrome with Asymmetric Epileptic Spasms; Focal Cortical Dysplasia Associated with Cobalamin c Deﬁ ciency. (Same patient as in Figure 7-21 to 7-23) A 4-month-
old boy with asymmetric epileptic spasms associated with cobalamin c deﬁ  ciency. He developed seizure, hyperthermia, and apnea and was intubated. He developed NCSE. Emergency ictal SPECT 
shows hyperperfusion in the left frontal region concordant with the MRI (black arrow). EEG during the SPECT injection (open arrow) showed ictal activity arising from the left frontal region during 
the versive seizure. He underwent emergency invasive EEG monitoring followed by resection of epileptogenic zone in the left frontal region. The patient has been free of disabling seizures since the 
surgery. Pathology conﬁ  rmed the diagnosis of mild FCD.
Epileptic spasms (ES) in some patients with West syndrome (WS) may be triggered by an epileptic focus in the neocortex. A leading spike can be used as a marker of the trigger zone for ES.68 
However, a study of WS by ictal SPECT demonstrates that the origin of hypsarrhythmia and ES may be diﬀ erent. Hypsarrhythmia appears to originate from cortical lesions, whereas the subcortical 
structures may be primarily responsible for the ES.69 Lee et al. proposed a model in which the brainstem was implicated as the source of hypsarrhythmia and ES.70 Asymmetric epileptic spasms are 
correlated with structural abnormalities, especially FCD in over 90% of cases. Functional modalities such as interictal PET and ictal SPECT play important roles in identiﬁ  cation of epileptic foci.64,71 
Although focal cortical dysplasia can be seen in rare neurometabolic diseases such as nonketotic hyperglycinemia or cerebrohepatorenal syndrome, it has never been reported in cobalamin c 
deﬁ  ciency. Underlying neurometabolic disease is not an absolute contraindication for epilepsy surgery.
Outcomes after surgery, cortical resection, or hemispherectomy in infants with catastrophic focal epilepsy are very good. About 75–78% are seizure-free or have at least a 90% seizure reduction.65,66 
Life-saving epilepsy surgery for status epilepticus caused by cortical dysplasia has been reported.67