FIGURE 9 10. Panayiotopoulos Syndrome. A 5-year-old girl with nocturnal GTCS associated with clicking noises from her mouth. She went back to sleep and then woke up with a throbbing 
headache. EEG shows clone-like repetitive occipital spike-wave discharges. Brain MRI was normal. The patient has normal development and been seizure free for over 2 years.
Panayiotopoulos syndrome (PS) is one of the most common childhood seizure disorders. It is characterized by prolonged, predominantly autonomic symptoms with EEG that shows shifting and/
or multiple foci, often with occipital predominance. Three-quarters of patients have their ﬁ  rst seizure between the ages of 3 and 6 years with a peak at 5 years. Seizures in PS occur predominantly in 
sleep. Vomiting is the most common symptom. Versive seizure is seen in 60%, and progression to generalized convulsions is quite frequent. Headache may be described and is concurrent with other 
autonomic symptoms. Most patients will have between two and ﬁ  ve seizures. Approximately one-third had partial status epilepticus.
The interictal EEG of PS shows a normal background with high-amplitude sharp- and slow-wave complexes. These are similar in morphology to those seen in benign childhood epilepsy with 
centro-temporal spikes. However, in PS, there is great variability in location. Occipital localization is the most common, but all other brain regions may be involved. Moreover, the complexes 
frequently shift in location, this possibly being age related. Brief generalized discharges are occasionally encountered. The sharp waves or sharp- and slow-wave complexes may repeat themselves 
regularly and propagate, especially to frontal regions. The term “clone-like” has been used to describe this appearance. EEG abnormalities in PS are accentuated by sleep. Patients are not expected 
to be photosensitive. Variants of the EEG that are uncommon, but compatible, with the diagnosis include mild background abnormalities and small or inconspicuous spikes. EEG Similar patterns to 
the ones seen in PS occasionally occur randomly in other children. Ten percent of patients with PS may have a normal awake EEG, but abnormalities are nearly always seen in sleep EEG or a series of 
EEGs. Consistently normal EEGs are exceptional. None of the interictal EEG abnormalities in PS appear to determine prognosis.6,10,11
EEG foci in most patients with PS frequently shift locations, multiply, and propagate diﬀ usely with age rather than persistently localizing in the occipital region. The occipital EEG spikes appeared 
initially and then shifted to the Fp region or appeared at the same time as Fp spikes, forming an Fp-O EEG pattern resulting in secondary occipitofrontopolar synchrony. This phenomenon is an 
age-dependent nonspeciﬁ  c EEG pattern reﬂ  ecting the maturational process of the brain.12
MEG in most patients showed epileptic focus in the parieto-occipital sulcus (61.5%) or calcarine sulcus (30.8%). Despite Fp-O synchronization of spike discharges in the EEG, no frontal focus was 
found.13