FIGURE 9 76. Emotion and Autonomic Nervous System (ANS); During Nondominant Temporal Lobe Seizure; Mesial Temporal Sclerosis (MTS). A 10-year-old right-
handed girl with learning disability, behavioral outbursts, inattention, and medically intractable epilepsy due to a left mesial temporal lesion. She had a simple febrile convulsion 
at 4 years of age. Her seizure was described as a rising sensation from her stomach, fear feeling (mom called it a “panic attack”), and orofacial automatism followed by coughing, 
pupillary dilatation, and vomiting with no altered mental status. She answered questions appropriately throughout the seizure, which could last up to 30 minutes. Postictally, she 
was always alert and rubbed her nose with her left hand (postictal nosewiping). (A) Coronal MRI with FLAIR shows well-circumscribed increased signal intensity in the left mesial 
temporal region (arrow). (B) Interictal PET shows marked hypometabolism in the left mesial temporal region (arrow head). Neuropsychological testing revealed normal verbal but 
poor visual memory. WADA test exhibited language and verbal memory lateralization to both hemispheres, but greater on the right side. EEG during her typical seizure (10 sec 
after vomiting and coughing) shows signiﬁ  cant cardiac arrhythmia in the ECG channel (solid arrow). Five seconds after this EEG page (not shown), the patient desaturated and 
required oxygen supplementation. The patient has been seizure-free after the left temporal lobectomy. Pathology conﬁ  rmed the diagnosis of MTS. 
Seizure semiology, including automatisms without altered mental status, ictal vomitus, ictal coughing, and ictal panic attack, is strongly supportive of epileptic focus in the 
nondominant temporal lobe. This seizure semiology and pupillary dilatation or cardiac arrhythmia, occurring during the seizures, are caused by stimulation of Papez circuit, which 
controls both emotion and the autonomic nervous system (ANS). ANS changes are asymmetric and usually more prominent in the nondominant hemisphere. Ipsilateral postictal 
nosewiping is a very sensitive and speciﬁ  c seizure symptomatology for temporal lobe seizures.134
Forced lateralization of verbal memory to the opposite hemisphere usually jeopardizes visual memory and causes nonverbal memory impairment.135