FIGURE 7 71. ESES (Electrical Status Epilepticus During Slow Sleep); Intrauterine Stroke. An 8-year-old left-handed boy with mild global developmental delay, medically intractable 
epilepsy, and right hemiparesis resulting from an intrauterine stroke. He recently developed cognitive decline and increased seizures. His seizures were stereotypical and described as a rising 
sensation in his stomach, spacing out, left-hand automatisms, and loss of awareness followed by postictal confusion. MRI shows evidence of remote left middle cerebral artery stroke with thalamic 
atrophy. Interictal EEG during slow sleep shows nearly continuous bisynchronous sharp waves, maximally expressed in the left centro-temporal region consistent with the diagnosis of ESES. The 
patient has been seizure-free and has shown signiﬁ  cant improvement of language and cognitive function after the left functional hemispherectomy. EEG has normalized since the surgery.
ESES is an electrographic pattern characterized by nearly continuous slow spike-wave discharges, usually diﬀ use or generalized in distribution during NREM sleep but focal during awake or 
REM states. The spike-wave discharges occur in >85% of NREM sleep, although a spike-wave index of less than 85% has been used by some authors. In the original series, the EEG pattern of ESES 
was described as consisting of “generalized” or “diﬀ use” slow spike-wave discharges at 1.5–2 Hz. However, cases displaying slow spikes devoid of the wave component, sharp waves or with relative 
focality, albeit continuous, mainly involving the temporal or frontal regions, or markedly asymmetrical spike-wave activity over the two hemispheres have been observed.134 CSWS (continuous spike-
wave during slow sleep) refers to both the EEG and clinical features (cognitive and behavior disorders), but practically, both ESES and CSWS terms are interchangeable. Interictal EEG abnormalities 
may have a role in cognitive impairment.143 Congenital stroke was seen in 10% of 67 patients with ESES pattern in one study.143 Early thalamic injuries have been reported to be a facilitating factor in 
provoking ESES.145–147