FIGURE 4 87. Occipital Intermittent Rhythmic Delta Activity (OIRDA) and Polymorphic Delta Activity (PDA); Subcortical Focal Cortical Dysplasia. A 4-year-old girl with 
medically intractable epilepsy due to focal cortical dysplasia. Her seizure was described as stiﬀ ening and clonic jerking of her left arm and leg. Cranial MRI reveals a large focal cortical 
dysplasia in the right temporal region causing dilatation of a temporal horn of left lateral ventricle (arrows). EEG during drowsiness shows constant rhythmic, high-voltage, 2.5–3.5-Hz delta 
activity (double arrows), intermixed with PDA (open arrow) in the right occipital region corresponding to the location of a subcortical focal cortical dysplasia. 
Focal PDA is seen in half of the patients with focal cortical dysplasia.100 Although the mechanisms remain unclear, it was hypothesized that focal PDA recorded over neocortical lesions is 
probably due to underlying white matter abnormalities rather than the lesion itself.101 Malformation of cortical development must be in the diﬀ erential diagnosis of localized PDA.43
Intermittent rhythmic delta activity (IRDA) is generated by either cortex or deep gray matter. Persistent unilateral IRDA is usually associated with deep lesion. When present in association 
with focal cerebral lesion, it is usually indicative of the process that begins to produce an active widespread encephalopathy. Although frontal predominance is typical in adults, occipital 
predominance is more common in children less than 10–15 years; this is likely to be related to maturation rather than to any morphological abnormality. Although frequently bilateral, 
IRDA may occur predominantly unilaterally. Even when it occurs unilaterally in association with lateralized supratentorial lesion, the lateralization of the IRDA, although usually ipsilateral, 
may even be contralateral to the focal lesion. Therefore, when IRDA is present, determining whether it is due to a focal lesion will depend on persistent localizing signs, and not on the 
morphology or even the laterality of IRDA.102