FIGURE 482. Lateralized Monorhythmic/Polymorphic Delta Activity; Acute Herpes Simplex Encephalitis Involving Left Mesial Temporal Region. A 7-year-old previously healthy 
boy who presented with high fever, lethargy, aphasia, right hemiparesis, and a new-onset secondarily GTCS. CSF examination showed mild lymphocytic pleocytosis with normal protein but 
slightly low glucose. Brain CT was unremarkable. EEG performed 2 hours after the lumbar puncture shows continuously diﬀ use monorhythmic and polymorphic delta activity over the left 
hemisphere with no evolving pattern. Brain MRI performed 18 hours later shows hyperintensity in the left mesial temporal region in an axial FLAIR sequence and hypointensity in the left 
mesial temporal in a coronal T1-weighted image (open arrow). The patient was treated with Acyclovir immediately in the ED. CSF PCR for HSV came back positive the next day after the MRI. 
During the earlier stages of the disease, the background activity is disorganized and localized or lateralized polymorphic delta activity develops with predominance over the involved 
temporal areas. Between 2 and 5 days after the onset of the disease, unilateral or bilateral periodic complexes (PLEDs or BiPLEDs), occurring every 1–3 sec develops. The periodic complexes 
last only 3–4 days, and almost always disappear in a week no matter what the clinical features are. On Occasion, the periodic complexes has been observed up to 24 and 30 days after the 
onset of the disease. EEG changes usually lag behind the clinical changes. MRI together with EEG was abnormal early in the disease stressing their signiﬁ  cant role in any suspected case of 
HSE.93–95 The sensitivity of the EEG is approximately 84%, but the speciﬁ  city is only 32.5 %. PCR detection of HSV DNA in the CSF has become the diagnostic method of choice. The sensitivity 
and speciﬁ  city are 94% and 98%, respectively. The CSF remains PCR-positive for HSV DNA in more than 80% of cases even 1 week after the initiation of antiviral therapy in cases of HSE.96,97