FIGURE 9 156. Slow Direct Current (DC) Shifts; Supplementary Sensorimotor Area (SSMA) Seizure. A 7-year-old girl with medically intractable epilepsy caused by 
a focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) in the left SSMA (box). She presented with Doose syndrome-like epilepsy. She subsequently developed absence-like seizures and asymmetric/
unilateral tonic seizures. Subdural EEG using LFF of 0.05 Hz recorded one of her typical asymmetric tonic seizures described as slight head turning to the left side with left arm 
tonic stiﬀ ening. EEG shows a slow DC shifts (box A) at the DC3 depth electrode, which is located at the left SSMA. This occurs approximately 12 sec before the onset of HFOs, 
which are diﬀ use but maximally expressed at DC3. Ten seconds later, she develops her typical seizure, as described above, lasting for approximately 9 sec. Note ictal tachycardia 
(box B), which occurs 5 sec after the onset of HFOs.
Ikeda concluded that (1) ictal DC shifts were observed in 85% of all the recorded seizures in subdural EEG and in 23% of all the scalp EEG recordings by using LFF of 0.016 Hz 
for the AC ampliﬁ  er; (2) ictal DC shifts were mainly surface negative in polarity; (3) they started 1–10 sec earlier than the conventional ictal EEG onset; (4) ictal DC shifts were 
seen in a more restricted area (one to two electrodes) compared with the dimension deﬁ  ned by the conventional ictal EEG changes; (5) ictal DC shifts often coincided with the 
electrodecremental pattern; (6) scalp-recorded ictal slow shifts have high speciﬁ  city but low sensitivity; (7) A DC ampliﬁ  er is not necessary to record slow DC shifts; instead, an 
AC ampliﬁ  er with a long time constant can be used.127,133,289 The subdurally recorded ictal DC shifts are clinically useful in strengthening the conventional ictal EEG ﬁ  nding and 
conﬁ  rming the epileptogenic area. In neocortical seizures, even subdural recordings show widely distributed or ill-deﬁ  ned initial ictal change, especially when imaging studies 
do not reveal a clear focal. In addition, it would be diﬃ  cult to judge the area most attenuated in amplitude from the electrodecremental pattern, which is usually seen as the 
initial ictal EEG changes in neocortical seizures. Ictal DC shifts, in contrast, are so prominent and transient that the areas that show the maximal changes of ictal DC shifts are easily 
recognized.127 Ictal slow DC shifts were also recorded by depth electrodes placed in the hippocampus in patients with MTLE.126