FIGURE 9 137. High-Frequency Oscillations (HFOs); Start-Stop-Start Phenomenon. (Same patient as in Figure 9-136) Subdural EEG recording with a bipolar montage 
over the right hemisphere shows diﬀ use high-voltage spike-wave discharges (box A) followed by diﬀ use background attenuation for 7–8 sec, and then a run of sharp waves at 
A47 (box B). At the lower page and insert, the same incidence as box A with the reference run, EEG shows a brief burst of low-voltage fast activity (50–60 Hz) at A47, consistent 
with “high-frequency oscillations (HFOs).” This phenomenon is also called “start-stop-start” (SSS) phenomenon.237
HFOs characterize by very fast activity, ranging from 80–150 Hz, are noted at the epileptic focus in neocortical epilepsy during subdural EEG recording.238 Recent ﬁ  ndings 
suggest that HFOs ranging between 100 and 500 Hz might be closely linked to epileptogenesis.239 Ripples (80–160 Hz) and fast ripples (250–500 Hz) occur frequently during IEDs 
and may reﬂ  ect pathological hypersynchronous events. During ictal recordings, HFOs could be identiﬁ  ed and occurred mostly in the region of primary epileptogenesis and less 
frequently in areas of secondary spread.240 HFOs are an important electrophysiological manifestation of epileptic tissue and are associated closely with the spiking region and 
partly with the seizure onset zone (SOZ). Although ripples and fast ripples share some characteristics, increasing in the SOZ and spiking regions, fast ripples were more speciﬁ  c to 
the SOZ region than ripples.239
The SSS phenomenon is deﬁ  ned as a pair of sequential ictal potentials separated by complete or almost complete cessation of seizure activity; the SSS phenomenon was 
found on subdural recordings in 23% of 98 patients.237 The two phases were morphologically similar. The ﬁ  rst “start” usually had a narrow ﬁ  eld.241 Fifty-eight percent of SSS seizures 
showed a complete stop. Thirty-ﬁ  ve percent of patients and seizures restarted in a diﬀ erent location than the ﬁ  rst start. When in diﬀ erent locations, the start, not the restart, is 
correlated with the non-SSS origin. SSS seizures arose in the same region as non-SSS seizures in almost all patients.237 Subsequently, the SSS phenomenon was also observed in 
scalp EEG, sphenoidal, and foramen ovale electrodes, and the recognition of the phenomenon may improve the accuracy of seizure localization.241,242