FIGURE 9 72. Right Mesio-Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (mTLE); Focal Cortical Dysplasia, Right Hippocampus. A 17-year-old right-handed girl with recurrent episodes of deja vu. Presurgical 
workup was consistent with right mesio-temporal epilepsy. EEG shows IEDs in the right anterior temporal region (open arrow).
IEDs in MTLE show negative spikes and sharp waves in the sphenoidal, T1/T2, and F7/F8 electrodes. These IEDs are an expression of epileptiform activity in the parahippocampal cortex. Spikes in 
the hippocampus are usually not seen in scalp electrodes (So, 2001). Most IEDs are accompanied by a widespread positivity over the contralateral central-parietal region or vertex.100 Bilateral IEDs 
occur in one-third of patients, often during NREM sleep. IEDs recorded during wakefulness and REM sleep are more often lateralized and closely associated with the area of seizure onset.101
Patients with MTS have >90% of their IEDs in the anterior temporal region. Therefore, frequent posterior or extratemporal sharp waves are red ﬂ  ags for the diagnosis of hippocampal sclerosis. 
Rarely, IEDs can be seen in lateral temporal or frontal regions due to spreading of the discharges to the orbitofrontal or temporal neocortex via the limbic system. In MTLE, concordance of abnormal 
MRI and IEDs is associated with good surgical outcome and is a better indicator than concordance of abnormal MRI and ictal EEG activity but nonlateralizing IEDs.102 Although bilateral IEDs decrease 
the chance of favorable postoperative outcome, patients with bitemporal IEDs but MRI hippocampal abnormalities concordant with the ictal-onset region still can have a good to excellent surgical 
outcome.68 Seizure recording may not be necessary if serial routine EEGs are consistently concordant with MRI-identiﬁ  ed unilateral hippocampal atrophy.103
Deja vu probably depends upon a neuronal network that engages both medial and lateral aspects of the temporal lobe, and that of the anterior hippocampus, amygdala, and superior temporal 
gyrus have relatively privileged access to this circuit. Autonomic and psychic auras were more frequently associated with right-sided temporal lobe lesions,120,121 although their use in lateralization has 
been questioned.122