FIGURE 9 30. Apneic Spell: Cardiac Arrhythmia Associated with Cardiac Rhabdomyoma; Tuberous Sclerosis Complex (TSC). A 9-month-old boy who presented to the ED with recurrent 
apneic episodes. Physical examination revealed multiple hypopigmented patches over his body and limbs. MRI shows multiple cortical tubers and subependymal nodules. The diagnosis of TSC was 
made after the MRI. Although EEG recording shows no deﬁ  nite epileptiform activity, the ECG channel (box) shows a marked cardiac arrhythmia. Cardiology consultation revealed ventricular pre-
excitation syndrome with obstructive subaortic rhabdomyoma.
Approximately 50–65% of patients with TSC have rhabdomyoma; most of the tumors usually regress with increasing age and are asymptomatic. Possible prevalence of Wolﬀ -Parkinson-White 
syndrome WPW in TSC is 1.5%. The etiology of WPW in TSC is unknown. There was a hypothesis that some of the cells in the cardiac rhabdomyoma are structurally identical to normal Purkinje cells. 
Therefore, WPW may be caused by rhabdomyomatous tissue traversing the atrioventricular junction acting as the accessory pathway bypassing the atrioventricular node. Sudden unexpected death 
in infancy has been reported in TSC. It is possible that some of these cases may be caused by atrial arrhythmias, which, when associated with anterograde conduction down an accessory pathway, 
provoke ventricular ﬁ  brillation.
Ten patients with concurrent diagnoses of WPW and TSC were reported by Callaghan.44 Nine cases were diagnosed during the ﬁ  rst year of life. WPW was associated with supraventricular 
tachycardias in eight cases, and with cardiac rhabdomyoma in nine cases. One child died from cardiac failure secondary to obstruction of the left ventricular outﬂ  ow tract by a rhabdomyoma. 
Therefore, cardiac arhythmia, most commonly, WPW and supraventricular tachycardia as well as cardiac rhabdomyomas must be considered in all patients with TSC. Infants diagnosed with tuberous 
sclerosis should always have an ECG and echocardiogram to exclude the possibility of pre-excitation and the presence of rhabdomyoma.44,45
Carbamazepine has been reported to induce cardiac arrhythmias in the patients with TSC who have cardiac rhabdomyomas and should be used with caution.46