FIGURE 7 37. Ipsilateral Rhythmic Theta Activity (Intrinsic Epileptogenicity); Malformation of Cortical Development (MCD), Left Hemisphere. A 3-year-old left-handed girl with 
intractable epilepsy, severe global developmental delay associated with malformation of cortical development in the left hemisphere. She had a history of infantile spasms at 4 months of age. She 
presented with daily episodes of asymmetric epileptic spasms. MRI demonstrates left frontal cortical dysplasia (open arrow) and left frontal periventricular nodular heterotopia (PNH) (small arrows). 
Interictal PET shows diﬀ use hypometabolism in the left hemisphere, maximally expressed in the frontal region (arrow). EEG demonstrates very frequent runs of rhythmic theta and alpha activity in 
the left fronto-central region, with spreading to the midline and, to a lesser degree, to the right centro-parietal region. 
In a series of 132 patients with cortical dysgenesis, 15% had nodular heterotopias.1 Nodule formation may be the result of (1) failure of a stop signal in the germinal periventricular region, leading to cell 
overproduction, and (2) early transformation of radial glial cells into astrocytes, resulting in defective neuronal migration. The intrinsic interictal epileptiform activity of nodules may be due to an impaired 
intranodular GABAergic system.94 Two electroclinical patterns of PNH emerged: (1) simple PNH, characterized by normal intelligence and seizures, usually partial, that begin during the second decade of 
life—the seizures never become frequent and tend to disappear or become very rare, and the EEG shows focal abnormalities—and (2) PNH plus, characterized by mental retardation and seizures that 
begin during the ﬁ  rst decade of life. The seizures were very frequent in most cases with drop attacks. Seizures were often medically refractory. The EEG showed focal and bisynchronous abnormalities.95
The interictal EEG abnormalities were always focal and consistent with the location of the PNH in focal PNH, often bilateral asynchronous foci in the patients with bilateral and symmetrical PNH, 
and the posterior epileptiform abnormalities in those with unilateral or asymmetrical bilateral PNH, the side always being the same as that of the anatomic malformation.96,97 Recurrent seizures were 
described in 82%, mainly partial seizures with temporo-parieto-occipital auras.97
The best predictor of surgical outcome is the presence of a focal epileptic generator that may or may not include the PNH. Invasive recording is required in patients with PNH to improve 
localization and is the key to better outcome.97 Good outcomes can be achieved for unilateral heterotopia when the surgery is guided by a careful invasive presurgical study. The overlying cortex is 
usually part of the epileptogenic zone and should be resected. In some cases, part of the nodular formation was left in situ, yet outcomes were excellent. Outcome in bilateral heterotopia was less 
positive, although seizure reduction was noted.94