FIGURE 4 71. Periodic Lateralized Epileptiform Discharges (PLEDs) in Epilepsia Partialis Continua (EPC); Hydrocephalus Secondary to Grade 4 Intraventricular 
Hemorrhage (IVH). A 2-year-old boy born 34 weeks GA with grade 4 intraventricular hemorrhage (IVH). He subsequently developed hydrocephalus requiring multiple VP shunt revisions, 
severely developmental delay, spastic quadriparesis, and intractable epilepsy. His seizure was described as continuous clonic jerking of his left arm (EPC) accompanied by horizontal 
nystagmus. Cranial CT shows severe hydrocephalus in both hemispheres, greater in the right hemisphere with VP shunt insertion in the right lateral ventricle. EEG demonstrates PLEDs in 
the right temporal-parietal-occipital regions with relative preservation of background activity in the left hemisphere. Sharp waves in the right hemisphere either were time-locked with 
clonic jerking or occurred independently without clinical accompaniment. PLEDs were ﬁ  rst described by Chatrian et al.76 to deﬁ  ne an EEG pattern consisting of sharp waves, spikes (alone 
or associated with slow waves), or more complex waveforms occurring at periodic intervals. PLEDs usually occur at the rate of 1–2/sec and are commonly seen in posterior head region, 
especially in the parietal areas. It is sometimes associated with EPC.77 This EEG pattern is usually related to an acute or subacute focal brain lesion involving gray matter.78 Chronic PLEDs 
were also reported in 9% of patients with intractable epilepsy who had structural abnormalities such as cortical dysplasia or severe remote cerebral injury.79,80
In a recent review of 96 patients with PLEDs,81 acute stroke, tumor, and CNS infection were the most common etiologies. Others included acute hemorrhage, TBI, PRES, familial 
hemiplegic migraine, and cerebral amyloidosis. PLEDs were more periodic when they were associated with acute viral encephalitis than with other etiologies.82 Seizure activity occurred in 
85% of patients with mortality rate of 27%. However, 50% of patients with PLEDs never developed clinical seizure.83