FIGURE 9 146. Periventricular Nodular Heterotopia; Symptomatic Focal Epilepsy. A 9-year-old previously healthy boy with ﬁ  ve seizures in the past 3 years. Seizures were described as 
staring, stiﬀ ening, inability to talk, increased oral secretions, cyanosis, and unresponsiveness with or without secondarily GTCS. 
MRI shows a small heterotopia adjacent to the frontal horn of the left lateral ventricle (arrow). EEG demonstrates a run of central vertex spikes intermingled with polymorphic delta activity. 
Unilateral PNH is frequently located in the posterior paratrigonal region (i.e., a watershed area) of the lateral ventricles and may extend into the white matter to involve adjacent neocortical and 
archicortical areas.266 Epilepsy in PNH patients is generated by abnormal anatomic circuitries including the heterotopic nodules and adjacent archicortical and neocortical areas. Regardless of the 
diﬀ erent MRI features, the main clinical problem in most PNH patients is the presence of focal drug-resistant epilepsy. The presence of risk factors for prenatal brain damage, the common location in 
the paratrigonal region, and the lack of familial cases all suggest that acquired factors, damaging a limited region of the developing brain, may provoke the genesis of unilateral nodules. The selective 
ablation of a subpopulation of dividing neuroblasts alters the migration and diﬀ erentiation of subsequently generated neurons, which in turn set the base for the formation of heterotopia.273,274 
Focal interictal EEG abnormalities are always consistent with the anatomic location of the PNH. In slow sleep, focal abnormalities frequently change in bilaterally diﬀ used bursts of polyspikes or 
multifocal interictal EEG abnormalities. Spikes may be asynchronous (mostly independent) and occur in multifocal regions. In a minority of patients, 3- to 4-Hz spike-wave discharges, mimicking 
primary generalized epilepsy, are noted.232 The ictal EEG abnormalities at the onset and immediately after the end of the seizures were always recorded in brain regions where PNH was located. These 
ﬁ  ndings suggest that epileptic discharges may take origin from abnormal circuitries located close to or involving the PNH.275 The clinical picture is related to the amount of heterotopic tissue, the 
distribution of nodules, and the extension to the overlying cortex. Therefore, the outcome is much more favorable in patients with unilateral PNH, especially single-nodule PNH, compared to patients 
with PNH associated with periventricular and subcortical nodules extending to the neocortex.266