FIGURE 3 66. Infantile Spasms; Akinetic and Extensor Types of Epileptic Spasms.  (Same EEG recording as in Figure 3-65) EEG during a cluster of epileptic spasms. EEG 
during the ﬁ  rst 1–3 sec shows the “akinetic type” of epileptic spasm. The patient stopped moving for 1–2 sec and then resumed his activity without confusion (arrow head), 
consistent with “akinetic type” of infantile spasm. A few seconds later, the patient developed a typical asymmetric epileptic spasm with left arm extension, mild movement of left 
arm, and eye jerking to the left side (open arrow), consistent with asymmetric infantile spasm. EEG shows some similarity in that there are bursts of low-voltage fast activities in 
the left occipital region during both akinetic and asymmetric epileptic spasms. The diﬀ erence is the pattern of spreading, with mild spreading of ictal activity to the parietal area 
during the akinetic spasm and more prominent anterior spreading to the motor area (Cz and C4) during the asymmetric epileptic spasms (double arrows). These EEG ﬁ  nding may 
explain the diﬀ erence in seizures and conﬁ  rm that the origin of epileptic focus is in the right occipital region. original epileptic focus in the right occipital region.
The epileptic spasms are probably subcortically mediated, but are modiﬁ  ed by input from the cortex, which is believed to be abnormally excitable and disorganized in infantile 
spasms. The bursts during ﬂ  exor spasms are too long for epileptic myoclonus. Therefore, the nature of epileptic spasms is tonic rather than myoclonic. However, the infrequent 
spontaneous myoclonic jerks, which can occur without spasms, and the head nodding could represent positive and negative myoclonus, respectively.51 Atonia is probably 
an expression of transient disruption of cortical function in the sensorimotor cortex. The focal epileptic event that operates through an inhibitory interference on the areas 
preparing the movements, or that directly involves a negative motor area provokes this disruption.52 Focal spike-induced cerebral transitory impairment can be related to the 
slow component of the spike-wave discharge.53 Epileptic negative myoclonus has been described in diﬀ erent heterogeneous epileptic syndromes in children and even in the 
newborn.54