FIGURE 7 21. West Syndrome with Asymmetric Epileptic Spasms; Focal Cortical Dysplasia Associated with Cobalamin C Deﬁ ciency. A 4-month-old boy with global developmental delay 
who presented with asymmetric epileptic spasms with tonic stiﬀ ening greater on the right side, with or without high-pitch cry. MRI shows possible focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) in the left frontal 
region (white arrow). EEG during one of his typical seizures demonstrates diﬀ use attenuation of background activity (electrodecrement) with superimposed low-voltage beta activity.
After treatment with zonisamide, the patient developed hyperthermia and apnea. He was intubated and was admitted from the ED to the PICU. He developed very frequent asymmetric epileptic 
spasms with persistent epileptic focus in the left hemisphere. Emergency ictal SPECT showed hyperperfusion in the left frontal region concordant with the location of FCD seen in the MRI (black 
arrow). He underwent emergency invasive EEG monitoring followed by resection of the epileptogenic zone in the left frontal region. The patient has been free of disabling seizures since the 
resection of the FCD and surrounding epileptogenic zone. Pathology conﬁ  rmed the diagnosis of mild FCD.
Asymmetric epileptic spasms are correlated with structural abnormalities, especially FCD in over 90% of cases. Functional modalities such as interictal PET and ictal SPECT play important roles 
in identiﬁ  cation of epileptic foci.64 Although FCD can be seen in rare neurometabolic diseases such as nonketotic hyperglycinemia or cerebrohepatorenal syndrome, it has never been reported in 
cobalamin c deﬁ  ciency. Underlying neurometabolic disease is not an absolute contraindication for epilepsy surgery.
Outcomes after surgery, cortical resection, or hemispherectomy in infants with catastrophic focal epilepsy are very good. About 75–78% are seizure-free or have at least a 90% seizure reduction.65,66 
Life-saving epilepsy surgery for status epilepticus caused by cortical dysplasia has been reported.67