FIGURE 9 62. Mesio-Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (mTLE); Dual Pathology: Focal Cortical Dysplasia (FCD) and Hippocampal Sclerosis. A 12-year-old left-handed boy with a history of 
recurrent staring spells accompanied by hand and orofacial automatisms without altered mental status. Sometimes, he also had a feeling of “heart palpitation” immediately prior to or during the 
seizures. He had no past history of febrile seizure. Axial FLAIR and coronal T2-weighted MRIs reveal increased signal intensity and decreased volume of the right hippocampus (arrows). EEG shows 
periodic sharp waves in the right anterior temporal region (arrow heads). Clinical features, EEG and MRI scans support the diagnosis of right mesial temporal lobe epilepsy. WADA test was compatible 
with nondominant right temporal lobe. The patient has been seizure-free since the right temporal lobectomy. Pathology showed a mild malformation of cortical development in the inferior 
temporal region and severe hippocampal sclerosis (dual pathology).
IEDs in MTLE show negative spikes and sharp waves in the sphenoidal, T1/T2, and F7/F8 electrodes. These IEDs are an expression of epileptiform activity in the parahippocampal cortex. Spikes in 
the hippocampus are usually not seen in scalp electrodes (So, 2001). Most IEDs are accompanied by a widespread positivity over the contralateral central-parietal region or vertex.100 Bilateral IEDs 
occur in one-third of patients, often during NREM sleep. IEDs recorded during wakefulness and REM sleep are more often lateralized and closely associated with the area of seizure onset.101
Patients with MTS have >90% of their IEDs in the anterior temporal region. Therefore, frequent posterior or extratemporal sharp waves are red ﬂ  ags for the diagnosis of hippocampal sclerosis. 
Rarely, IEDs can be seen in lateral temporal or frontal regions due to spreading of the discharges to the orbitofrontal or temporal neocortex via the limbic system. In MTLE, concordance of abnormal 
MRI and IEDs is associated with good surgical outcome and is a better indicator than concordance of abnormal MRI and ictal EEG activity but nonlateralizing IEDs.102 Although bilateral IEDs decrease 
the chance of favorable postoperative outcome, patients with bitemporal IEDs but MRI hippocampal abnormalities concordant with the ictal-onset region still can have a good to excellent surgical 
outcome.68 Seizure recording may not be necessary if serial routine EEGs are consistently concordant with MRI-identiﬁ  ed unilateral hippocampal atrophy.103
Automatisms with preserved responsiveness were observed exclusively during seizures arising from the right nondominant temporal lobe. They were not observed during seizures arising from the 
left temporal region.99