FIGURE 9 157. Electrocorticography (ECoG); Supplementary Sensorimotor Area (SSMA) Seizure Due to Severe Focal Cortical Dysplasia with Balloon Cells. A 14-year-old left-handed 
boy with a history of fever at 13 days of life and development of seizures 2 weeks later, diagnosed with encephalitis. He also has right hemiparesis and developmental delay. He had infantile spasms 
that evolved into LGS. His seizures occur mostly at night but may also occur during the day when he is fatigued. The seizures were described as clusters of right-sided stiﬀ ening and Todd’s paralysis 
consistent with epileptic spasms. MRI shows abnormal signal with volume loss in the left medial frontal white matter, consistent with gyriform calciﬁ  cation intermixed with cystic lesions. He 
underwent electrocorticography (ECoG), which shows repetitive spikes (box B) and continuous rhythmic spikes (box A) in the MIH 13 and MIH 14 (mid interhemispheric leads), respectively. Pathology 
after the resective surgery showed severe focal cortical dysplasia with balloon cells. The patient has been seizure free after the surgery.
Focal cortical dysplasia (FCD) is often associated with severe focal epilepsy. Intraoperative ECoG showed one of the following patterns: (1) repetitive electrographic seizures, (2) repetitive bursting 
discharges, or (3) continuous or quasicontinuous rhythmic spiking. One or more of these patterns were present in 67% with intractable focal epilepsy associated with FCD and, in only 2.5% with 
intractable focal epilepsy, were associated with other types of structural lesions. These ictal or continuous epileptogenic discharges (I/CEDs) were usually localized, which contrast with the more 
widespread interictal ECoG epileptic activity, and tended to correspond with the lesion seen in the MRI. Complete resection of the FCD displaying I/CEDs correlated with good surgical outcome. 
Three-fourths of the patients in whom the FCD displaying I/CEDs was entirely excised had favorable surgical outcome. FCDs are highly and intrinsically epileptogenic, and intraoperative ECoG 
identiﬁ  cation of this intrinsically epileptogenic dysplastic cortical tissue is critical to decide the extent of excision.73