FIGURE 9 67. Mesio-Temporal Lobe Epilepsy (mTLE); Right Anterior Temporal Spikes. An 18-year-old right-handed girl with autism and intractable complex partial 
seizures described as a “catatonic stare” with lip smacking and hand automatisms since 2 years of age. In the past 2 years, she started having secondarily generalized seizures. MRI 
shows right hippocampal atrophy. Interictal PET scan shows hypometabolism in the right temporal lobe. All routine EEGs were normal. Prolonged video-EEG shows subtle right 
anterior temporal spikes (*), best seen at the T1-T2 channel.
IEDs in MTLE show negative spikes and sharp waves in the sphenoidal, T1/T2, and F7/F8 electrodes. These IEDs are an expression of epileptiform activity in the parahippocampal 
cortex. Spikes in the hippocampus are usually not seen in scalp electrodes (So, 2001). Most IEDs are accompanied by a widespread positivity over the contralateral central-parietal 
region or vertex.100 Bilateral IEDs occur in one-third of patients, often during NREM sleep. IEDs recorded during wakefulness and REM sleep are more often lateralized and closely 
associated with the area of seizure onset.101
Patients with MTS have >90% of their IEDs in the anterior temporal region. Therefore, frequent posterior or extratemporal sharp waves are red ﬂ  ags for the diagnosis of 
hippocampal sclerosis. Rarely, IEDs can be seen in lateral temporal or frontal regions due to spreading of the discharges to the orbitofrontal or temporal neocortex via the 
limbic system. In MTLE, concordance of abnormal MRI and IEDs is associated with good surgical outcome and is a better indicator than concordance of abnormal MRI and ictal 
EEG activity but nonlateralizing IEDs.102 Although bilateral IEDs decrease the chance of favorable postoperative outcome, patients with bitemporal IEDs but MRI hippocampal 
abnormalities concordant with the ictal-onset region still can have a good to excellent surgical outcome.68 Seizure recording may not be necessary if serial routine EEGs are 
consistently concordant with MRI-identiﬁ  ed unilateral hippocampal atrophy.103