FIGURE 715. Asymmetric Epileptic Spasms; Focal Cortical Dysplasia (FCD). (Same patient as in Figure 7-11) After the remission of infantile spasms (IS), the patient had normal developmental 
milestones with minimal focal neurological deﬁ  cits that included pathologic left handedness, mild atrophy of the right thumb, mild right optic apraxia, asymmetric tonic neck reﬂ   ex, and hyperreﬂ   exia/ 
dorsiﬂ   exion of the right side. EEGs performed every 6 months were within normal limits. At 3. years of age, the patient developed epileptic spasms similar to the IS he had when he was 4 months old. (A) 
Axial inversion recovery MRI shows blurring of the gray-white matter junction and thickened cortex in the left mesial parietal region (arrow). (B) Coronal T2-weighted MRI shows thickened cortex in the 
left lateral/mesial parietal region (arrow). The MRI continued to show left hippocampal atrophy (not shown). Interictal EEG shows frequent and, at times, periodic sharp waves and frequent polymorphic 
delta slowing, maximal in the left parietal region. This ﬁ  nding is compatible with the hypsarrhythmia with consistent left parietal spikes seen at 4 months of age (Figure 7-12).
Cerebral maturation begins in the central regions and then extends to the occipital regions before occurring in the frontal lobes.37,38. Theoretically, lesions in the central and occipital regions would 
produce seizures earlier than those in the frontal region. Developmental process may play a role in clinical seizure expression and propagation of seizure activity. Cerebral lesions located in critical 
areas of brain maturation may have a role in the genesis of IS. Occipital lesions are found to be associated with the earliest onset of spasms, whereas frontal lesions are rare and associated with latest 
spasm onset.39,40
Patients with IS caused by FCD frequently develop partial seizures that can precede, be simultaneous with, or follow the cluster of epileptic spasms. Spasms can be easily controlled by ACTH 
or Vigabatrin. EEG epileptic foci tend to persist after spontaneous disappearance of the hypsarrhythmic pattern or after successful treatment. When spasms disappear, patients are left with focal 
epilepsy that is intractable to medical treatment, in contrast with IS. Antiepileptic drug (AED) treatment seems to be able to prevent the diﬀ use paroxysmal activity outside of the FCD that causes 
secondary generalization such as in IS, but the intrinsic epileptogenicity of the FCD is poorly aﬀ  ected by the AED.15,41