FIGURE 9 160. Epilepsia Partialis Continua (EPC); POLG1 Mutation.  A 16-year-old girl with intractable epilepsy, peripheral neuropathy, ataxia, and mental deterioration. Her seizures include 
occipital lobe seizures and epilepsia partialis continua (EPC). Brain MRI shows multifocal increased signal intensity in the right fronto-temporal region and cerebellum. EEG during the left EPC 
demonstrates sharp waves in the right central/centro-temporal region time-locked with EMG activity. Subtle polymorphic delta activity is also noted in the right hemisphere. Ten months later, she 
developed liver failure, brain stem involvement (ophthalmoplegia, facial weakness, and dysphagia) and died shortly after that.
POLG mutation produces a variety of neurological syndromes, including progressive external ophthalmoplegia, Alper’s syndrome, and mitochondrial spinocerebellar ataxia-epilepsy syndrome 
(MSCAE). Characteristic neurologic features of children with mutations in POLG1 were early-onset psychomotor regression, refractory seizures in the form of myoclonus and EPC,295,296 stroke-like 
episodes, and ataxia.296 Axonal neuropathies have been described, often causing profound sensory ataxia.297
Epilepsy is one of the most common manifestations of POLG1 disease. Epilepsy has an early predilection for the occipital lobes. Thereafter, patients develop simple partial motor seizures and 
complex partial seizures, myoclonus, and status epilepticus (SE). Repeated seizure activity, especially SE, contributes to worsening mitochondrial function, energy deﬁ  ciency, and a fatal outcome.298 A 
wide variety of occipital symptoms were noted. Almost all patients had occipital seizures. In addition, frontal and generalized epileptic activity occurred in most patients during seizure spread or SE.298 
POLG1 mutations should be considered in teenagers and young adults reporting episodic visual symptoms with migraine-like headaches and sudden-onset intractable seizures. Due to the risk of 
liver failure, valproic acid should be avoided when treating patients with POLG1 phenotypes.296,299