FIGURE 9 141. Supplementary Sensorimotor Area (SSMA) Seizure; Absence-Like Seizure. A 14-year-old boy with frontal lobe epilepsy caused by extensive malformation of cortical 
development (MCD) in the right frontal region. He had multiple types of seizures, including secondarily GTCS, asymmetric tonic seizures, and absence-like seizures. Axial FLAIR MRI shows the patient 
has been seizure free since the surgery. Axial and sagittal FLAIR MRIs demonstrate a lipoma in the right sylvian ﬁ  ssure (open arrow) and extensive polymicrogyria (PMG) in the entire right frontal lobe 
(arrows), including the mesial frontal area. Interictal PET scan shows hypometabolism in the right lateral and mesial frontal regions (double arrows). Ictal EEG shows bilateral synchronous slow spike-
wave discharges with right frontal predominance. The patient has been seizure free since the surgery. 
Cerebral lipomas account for 0.1–1.3% of brain tumors, and only 20% of them cause epilepsy.251 Fourteen cases of sylvian ﬁ  ssure lipomas have been reported, and only a few cases underwent 
surgical resection.252 A variety of vascular abnormalities, including hypervascularization, venous angioma, dilatation and tortuosity of the feeding arteries, abnormal arterial branches, and saccular 
aneurysm, have been described in patients with cerebral lipoma. Thus, development of a lipoma may also involve vascular abnormalities.253 Perisylvian lipoma is also associated with malformations 
of cortical development (MCDs).254,255 Intracranial lipomas are due to persistence of the primitive meninx (mesenchymatous origin) followed by transformation into mature adipose cells during 
the ﬁ  rst weeks of intrauterine life. Resorption of the rudimentary meninges should be complete by the 10th week. The presence of the lipoma could have secondary or concomitant eﬀ ects on the 
development of adjacent cortical structures, which takes place between the 6th and 20th weeks: as an obstacle to migration of gray matter, gyration abnormalities, or vascular defects resulting from 
the lesion and/or its hypervascularization.254 Ischemia could account for the PMG observed in some patients. Therefore, the causes of epilepsy probably involve vascular abnormalities and MCDs. Due 
to the complexity of the lesion, hemispheric lipomas are better classiﬁ  ed with localized cortical malformations rather than simple extracerebral malformations.254,256
Frontal absences can be caused by epileptic discharges arising from several areas of the frontal region, including SSMA, orbitofrontal region, and the cingulate gyrus. Compared with absences of 
childhood absence epilepsy, frontal lobe absences may have subtle repetitive vocalization, rocking movements, mild version, and brief postictal confusion. The patient may report awareness of motor 
arrest without loss of consciousness. The staring may evolve into a secondarily GTCS via version of the head and eyes, and focal or bilateral tonic posturing of the upper limb(s). Frontal absences seem 
to have a more anterior epileptogenic zone than those with bilateral asymmetric tonic seizures. However, the clinical and EEG features can be very close to that of a typical or simple absence seizure.47,48
Secondarily generalized discharges are a common occurrence with frontal lobe epilepsy. The EEG ﬁ  ndings that suggest secondary bilateral synchrony include (1) focal spikes or sharp waves 
consistently occurring in one area, (2) focal spike discharges that precede or initiate more generalized bursts, and (3) persistent lateralized abnormalities such as slowing or an asymmetry over the 
involved area.49,50