FIGURE 4 44. Posterior Reversible Leukoencephalopathy; Right Posterior Temporal Theta Slowing. A 7-year-old boy with severe asthma who was admitted to 
the PICU for status asthmaticus. He received a treatment with high-dose corticosteroid and developed. He became lethargic and developed a new-onset seizure described as 
headache, vomiting, blindness followed by head and eyes deviating to the left side, left arm clonic jerking and then GTCS after a shooting of blood pressure to 170/110 mmHg. 
Axial FLAIR-sequence MRI shows multiple hyperintensity lesions in the white matter of the right occipital region (open arrow), the gray matter of the left occipital (double arrows) 
and periventricular white matter in the left occipital region (arrow). These are consistent with posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES) caused by hypertension due 
to steroid treatment. The patient recovered within 1 week after hypertension was controlled. EEG after the seizure shows rhythmic theta activity intermixed with small spikes in 
the right parietal-posterior temporal region. 
Hypertensive encephalopathy is the cause of this syndrome caused by suddenly increased systemic blood pressure exceeding the autoregulatory capability of the brain 
vasculature. Regions of vasodilatation and vasoconstriction develop, especially in arterial boundary zones, and there is breakdown of the blood–brain barrier with focal transudation 
of ﬂ  uid and petechial hemorrhages. Functional vascular changes and edema, rather than infarction, play a major role. The patients usually have a rapid resolution of clinical and 
imaging abnormalities when blood pressure is lowered. The hyperintense signal seen mainly in the hemisphere where the seizures predominated. FLAIR is the sensitive sequence 
to the characteristic cortical and subcortical edema of PRES. The FLAIR sequence shows involvement of gray matter to be a much greater part of this syndrome than previously 
thought; the vasogenic edema may even originate in the cortex.35,36